From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Babaro. This is the Daily.
[music]
For 4 months, hundreds of men from
Venezuela said they endured [music]
physical abuse,
mental abuse,
and sexual abuse. [music]
inside a notorious prison. [music]
[music] Today, what my colleague Julie
Turkowitz found actually happened inside
[music] that prison and why many now see
it as perhaps [music] the darkest
chapter of all in President Trump's
program of mass deportation.
>> [music]
>> It's Monday, December 8th.
Julie, you have spent the past many
months investigating the plight of these
roughly 200 Venezuelan nationals who
were deported by the Trump
administration from the US to a prison
in El Salvador. And along the way, you
have broke story after story about who
they are, what they did or didn't do.
And now you bring us your latest
investigation. So tell us what animated
that latest probe and and what you
found. So, I think that so many
listeners remember back in March when
these 250 or so Venezuelan men were put
on planes to this foreign prison in El
Salvador, accused sumearily without
trials of being terrorists
and then in a very very public way taken
off the planes, bent at the waist.
shackled, shaved, and put in this
maximum security prison in El Salvador.
>> Right? It was the most indelible image
in President Trump's mass deportation
campaign because it felt the most
unfamiliar and kind of brutal.
>> Absolutely. And I think that it was
meant to send a message. This is what
will happen to you if you come to the
United States illegally. And after that,
the men disappeared.
They did not have access to lawyers.
They did not have access to family
members. There were family members in
Karakas in the United States marching
asking for some kind of information
about their loved ones. You had
courtroom tussles in the United States
with lawyers trying to get these folks
back to the US or at the very least try
and find some kind of information about
what had happened to them,
>> right? which was met with a wall of
resistance from the Trump administration
who basically said, "Take our word for
it that these are the worst of the
worst."
>> Absolutely. And we as journalists asked
over and over again. Please give us
information about these men. Give us
their names. Their names were never
released. M and we also asked for
information about their criminal
histories, but the Trump administration
refused to give us sort of a list
describing the different alleged crimes
that had been committed by all of these
men. The only ways that we found out who
they were was through leaks.
>> Mhm. Right. And so it began to feel like
a pretty endless black box.
>> Correct.
And then over the summer there is a
breakthrough and we start to hear that
there are talks happening between the US
government and the Venezuelan government
in which the US government is
considering releasing
these 250ome men from this Salvadoran
prison. And one day in July this is
exactly what happens. These men are
released and sent to Venezuela.
And finally, we have the opportunity to
find out what actually happened to these
men on the inside.
So, [music] I immediately begin speaking
with a team of reporters who I work with
who are inside Venezuela, [music]
and I ask them to race out and [music]
begin to document the reunions of these
men with their family members. And from
there, all of us as a team, three
Venezuelan reporters, [music] a
Venezuelan photographer, and myself, we
begin these sort of methodical
interviews of these men, talking to them
about [music] their experiences and what
they lived through on the inside. We
start collecting and cross-referencing
their stories, going [music] back, doing
follow-up interviews to confirm
timelines, facts, narratives in general.
We start photographing their injuries,
their physical conditions, talking to
them about the after effects [music]
of what they experienced, gathering
medical reports from doctors they've
seen. And what emerges is this pretty
clear and very consistent [music]
account of widespread abuse among the
men inside the prison. [music] The abuse
that they describe is physical. It is
psychological.
At times it is sexual. And [music]
in many cases the men describe it as
torture.
>> Wow.
>> And by the time we [music]
finish the reporting as a team, we have
interviewed 40 of these men.
>> [music]
>> Tell us about one of these men that you
spoke to whose story is very consistent
with what you heard from all 40.
>> Sure.
>> Luis Chakon is a young man from
Venezuela whose story is really
representative, I think, of of the
stories of so many of these men.
He is a father of three. He comes to the
United States from Venezuela in 2023. He
comes with his family. Like so many of
these guys, he says that he's fleeing a
really bad economic situation
and also that he is following this flow
of people that came up through the
Darian Gap,
>> right? and he's working in Milwaukee. He
is working for Uber as an Uber Eats
driver.
>> And the way that he tells the story is
that he is with his son and they are
doing Uber Eats deliveries and they go
to McDonald's and he gets an order for a
hamburger.
So, he is making this $11 McDonald's
delivery when he is pulled over by the
police
and told that he has a tail light out.
And this is what sort of begins his
journey to this maximum security prison
in El Salvador. Well, surely it wasn't
just a tail light out.
>> Turns out that Luis had had some
previous scuffles with the law.
>> He in 2024 had been accused of domestic
violence and the case was later
dismissed. He also had been accused of
stealing some things from a Walmart and
that case was still pending. So he had
been charged with theft and was awaiting
the next step in the case.
>> He is taken to the police station and it
is also in this place where he says that
officials notice some scars on his leg
and say something to the effect of, you
know, oh these, you know, we got to look
out for this guy.
These could be bullet wounds and they
also looked suspiciously at his tattoos,
he recalled.
>> And why does all that end up mattering?
What we know is that in many cases, the
Trump administration was using tattoos
as a sign that these individuals were
gang members and in fact had a a rating
system that it used to determine who was
a supposed member of a gang and then to
send people to this prison.
We have no evidence that Luis Chakon is
or was a member of this gang deua
just like we have very little evidence
that many of these men were members of
this gang. Nevertheless, they were sent
to this prison and the Trump
administration has said publicly that
they were all part of this gang. And
what does Luis describe as his journey
to this prison in your conversations
with him?
>> Luis Chakon has a very interesting
journey to the prison in El Salvador. He
describes
asking to be deported to Venezuela.
He does not want to extend his time at
all in detention because he knows that
he needs to get out and be somewhere
where he can make some money to support
his family. And he believes that he is
being sent by the United States to
Venezuela.
He has heard about these men going to El
Salvador. M
>> he's very scared that he's going to be
sent to El Salvador. He says that he was
assured that he was not going to El
Salvador and then he is loaded onto this
deportation plane.
But eventually they do land in El
Salvador. And the men who were on these
planes
described looking out their window
seeing a sign that indicated that they
had arrived in El Salvador and just the
terror of realizing that they might be
staying there.
They talked about Salvadoran guards
getting on the plane. One of them talked
about sort of trying to tighten their
seat belts in this feeble attempt to
stay on the plane
>> and then of course being forced off of
the airplane. And these guards are just
bending these guys at the waist,
slamming them down the stairs against
vehicles onto buses
and bringing them into
this feared prison where they are forced
to their knees, where they are shaved
and eventually
thrown. thrown into these prison cells
which have these four plank metal beds
that someone described as a sort of
living morg. And Louise specifically
recalls being told,
"This is hell.
You will leave here only in a body bag.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
[music]
So, Julie, what are the conditions that
Luis and the rest of these Venezuelans
find in this prison?
So the men are divided into cell blocks
approximately 10 men in each cell. They
are given bunk beds. Metal most often
without any kinds of mattress or sheet.
The water is a sort of open sistern.
They're supposed to use that water to
drink
>> as well as to bathe.
>> They're supposed to drink their bathing
water.
>> Correct. They also say that they are
consistently denied medical care. There
is one man named Aldo Kulminarees who
comes into the prison with diabetes. He
tells officials there he has diabetes
and needs insulin. He said that he was
denied insulin for 5 days. He's
eventually given the wrong kind of
insulin which leads to hypoglycemia and
two attacks that lead him to pass out.
Wow.
>> There is a young man who becomes very
very sick to the point where the other
inmates are bringing food and water to
his lips with their hands. And he's
eventually sent to an infirmary where he
says that a doctor told him he should
just resign himself. It is time to die.
>> That's stunning.
>> And for the most part, what these men
speak about is just constant physical
abuse.
This means beatings.
being kicked and dragged
and it also means restraint positions.
Many of the men spoke about a position
they called the gurua position, the
crane position. They were forced to
kneel for hours and handcuffed behind
their backs and then at times lifted by
the handcuffs
>> to put pressure on their shoulders and
backs and sometimes also stomped on
their feet and hands while in this
position.
>> That sounds like torture. This abuse
goes on for months and they talk about
getting to points of extreme
psychological desperation and one day
they sort of start to crack and they
decide that they're going to stop eating
and ask for better treatment and they
decide that they want to write their
messages.
They take some metal from the beds and
cut themselves
and using their own blood write on the
sheets messages like we are not
criminals, we are migrants
>> and they hang these sheets
from what they called the piping in the
cells. I mean they are that despondent
that they are writing messages of
protest in their own blood. That's how
far gone the situation has become.
>> Exactly. I don't think that they
believed they had any other options and
this was something.
But what happens next is an even bigger
rebellion in May. There's a guard search
of one of the cells. And during this
search,
officials beat a man so badly that he is
bleeding from head to toe, according to
Luis.
And this sets off so much anger
that some of the inmates
dislodge metal parts from their bed and
use the metal parts to open cell doors.
And for a moment, some of these men have
this taste of something like freedom.
Then of course they immediately realize
that they are completely outmatched by
the guards.
Luis [snorts]
tells us they retreat into their cells
and that is when the guards begin going
cell by cell and really punishing the
men, shooting them at point blank with
what they call rubber bullets in the
hand, in the head, in the leg.
My photographer colleague traveled
around Venezuela photographing
these men. And you can see one of them
has this gash down the front of his face
that he said was caused by a rubber
bullet that ricocheted off of his
forehead.
There is another man who said that he
was shot in the thigh with a rubber
bullet and has this really sort of
gnarly welt in his thigh that we
documented.
>> What happened after this shooting? Did
these men get any kind of medical
treatment?
>> So, they talk about asking for medical
care following these injuries and some
of them were eventually taken to an
infirmary. The man with the bullet in
his leg, for example, talks about it
being removed without any kind of
anesthesia.
>> And Louise describes how after this
attempted rebellion, what really happens
is there is a sort of new wave of
punishment and repression inside the
prison.
>> And what does that look like? So there
is an isolation room in the prison that
the men spoke to us about. They call
Isla the island.
And these men say that the island is
really the place where some of the most
depraved acts occurred.
Luis speaks about experiencing
punishment that included having his head
dunked in water as if the guards were
attempting to drown him.
And you know, this is pretty graphic for
for some of our listeners, but one of
the inmates talks about being taken
there alone by several of the guards
wearing hoods who forced him to perform
oral sex in this space.
Julie, throughout this period, as all
these horrific
actions are allegedly occurring, are
these men able to speak to anyone in the
outside world through phone calls,
emails, anything.
>> These men are denied access to the
people they want to speak to. During
this entire period, they receive two
important visits. one from Christine
Gnome, the head of the Department of
Homeland Security, and from the Red
Cross, which speaks to them, interviews
them, and delivers a report to the
government of El Salvador, but never
makes that report public.
>> H and as we know, [clears throat]
Secretary Gnome praises this operation.
So, it would seem she did not hear these
kinds of accounts from these men.
We don't know what Christine heard while
she was inside the prison. What we know
is that these men felt so powerless that
several of them began to contemplate
suicide.
Luis is one [music] of these men.
He had heard inside the prison that if
one person died, maybe all of them would
[music] be able to go free. And he gets
a sheet. He gets up on one of the beds
and he indicates to his fellow inmates
that he's going to hang himself
and they pull him down.
He said, "Were it not for these men,
Miss Companeros,
>> I would not be here today telling you
the story that I'm telling you.
[music]
I want to ask you what might seem like a
somewhat insensitive question given the
really shocking descriptions from these
men, but I think as journalists we have
to ask it. How do you and our colleagues
go about making sure that this harrowing
testimony is true?
This is a very important and fair
question. Of course, we interviewed 40
of these men. Their testimonies were
consistent with each other's, but we
weren't inside the prison.
>> Mhm.
>> We couldn't speak to the guards. We
couldn't speak to officials in El
Salvador. And so, we wanted somebody
else to help us understand
how much we should believe these
testimonies.
And so we reached out to a nonprofit
group of forensic experts and we
provided them with a summary of the
testimony as well as photographs of the
injuries in some cases doctor's reports.
>> You basically asked them to audit your
reporting.
>> Correct. And what they said was that the
testimony and the other evidence that we
provided were consistent and credible.
And they said that in their assessment,
much of the abuse that was described met
the United Nations definition of
torture. And I think it bears repeating
that this is torture inflicted on men
whose deportation to this prison was not
based on any normal legal process. They
were never tried on allegations of being
terrorists. In fact, the only judge who
ever touched their case was a federal
judge in the US who tried to stop the
flights carrying many of them from ever
landing in El Salvador, an order that
the Trump administration pretty much
ignored. And in the case of Louise, yes,
there are charges of theft in the US
that in theory might merit a regular old
deportation, but in no world would the
allegations against someone like him
ever seem to justify beatings and
torture in a prison in El Salvador.
>> Correct.
I'm curious what motivated the release
of these men if inevitably releasing
them would mean that they could tell
these stories to the world. Stories of
essentially torture.
>> It's a good question and I think that
many of us following the story thought
that these men might spend the rest of
their lives in this prison. But the
Venezuelan government, which wanted the
release of these men, had a bargaining
chip. And that bargaining chip is that
the government of Nicolas Maludo, the
country's autocrat, had been detaining
US citizens and US residents inside
Venezuela over the last year. And so by
July had amassed a sort of group of 10
US prisoners.
and the government of Venezuela
negotiated
with the government of the United States
the release of these 10 US citizens and
residents in exchange for the freedom of
these now 252 men who were in the
Salvador in prison.
>> So in the end it's Maduro, not Trump,
who forces these men's awful saga to
come to an end.
>> Yes. I mean, the Madur government
definitely has a hand in securing these
men's freedom.
>> So, I just want to reflect on what
happened in this prison and why it
happened. And at the end of the day, it
happened because the Trump
administration wanted it to happen. And
I'm old enough, and I suspect you are
too, to remember when the United States
had to reckon in a very visible and
official way with the idea that it had
carried out torture systematically after
9/11 to those that the US had detained
in response to those terror attacks that
year. And when the conduct that occurred
to these detainees was revealed,
American officials, members of Congress
were so offended and so convinced that
it betrayed America's values that they
released a report documenting it so the
whole country could see it and they
said, "This will never happen again."
And here it is again. not conducted by
the US per se as it was after 9/11, but
this time in a sense outsourced to a
foreign country by American government
officials.
How should we think about that?
It's hard to imagine that US officials
did not have some idea that something
like this was going to happen inside the
Salvadoran prison. Just 2 years before
these men were sent there, the US
government released its own report. It's
a public report saying that there was
strong reason to believe that torture
was happening inside the Salvadoran
prison system.
>> Wow. They knew.
>> They knew.
And I mean, one of the questions I have
is why there has not been more outrage
about what these men experienced inside
this prison. Why we have not seen the
same kind of outrage that we saw after
9/11.
>> And why do you think that is if you had
to make an educated journalistic guess
here? Yeah, it's very interesting that
the Trump administration and the Bule
administration didn't really try and
hide any of this. Donald Trump came into
the White House promising to address the
immigration problem at the border in the
country in general and he promised to
deter migration and that is what he has
done. I mean, the numbers at the US
border are way down. And what I was
thinking about a lot as I was reporting
this story
is how far basically are Americans
willing to go for migration deterrence?
And you know, when we went to the Trump
administration with our findings, they
did not deny any of the testimony.
Instead, a spokeswoman said to us that
we should be focusing our reporting
elsewhere, specifically on children who
had been killed by quote vicious illegal
aliens.
>> H I mean, first of all, that suggests
that the men who end up in this prison
in El Salvador have killed children, and
I don't believe you found any evidence
of that. Putting that aside, this sounds
like a spokesperson for the White House
basically saying to the New York Times,
"We've seen all your reporting. We've
seen these accounts of torture of men we
put in this prison." And our response
is, "Who cares?" Which is very striking.
>> Correct. And I should mention that that
the legal door is still open for the
Trump administration to continue sending
people to El Salvador
>> and to this prison in El Salvador.
>> Correct.
>> I want to end by asking you what has
become of men like Luis now that they
are released. Have they achieved
anything resembling normaly now that
they are back in [snorts] Venezuela? a
country of course that they had sought
to flee which is why they came to the
United States in the first place. Now
they are back having been through this
experience. What are they saying life is
like right now?
>> Sure. Well, Louise for one is separated
from his family. His partner and their
three children are in the United States.
All of these men talked about suffering
pretty intense psychological
trauma as well as physical problems.
They talked about blurred vision,
recurring migraines,
trouble breathing. Many of them
described themselves as zombies
essentially.
>> This sounds like a form of PTSD
>> for sure.
They talked about not being able to
sleep [music] and when they do sleep,
experiencing a sensation of of feeling
like they're back in the prison. And one
of the men in particular
described going to bed and hearing the
rattle of handcuffs, the voices of
Salvadoran officials, and the clang
of [music] his cell door.
>> Well, Julie, thank you very much. We
appreciate it.
>> Thanks, Michael.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back. [music]
[music] Here's
[music]
what else you need to know today. Since
this policy has started, we've gone from
20,000 cases of acute hepatitis B down
to 20 per year. Isn't that amazing?
20,000 to 20. [music] On Sunday, the
Republican chairman of the Senate Health
Committee, Bill Cassidy, recommended
that parents [music] vaccinate their
newborn babies against hepatitis B.
Despite a controversial vote on Friday
by a federal panel to end that decadesl
long recommendation,
Cassidy [music]
said that the government's original
recommendation dating back to 1991
[music] had prevented thousands of
infections and warned that babies who do
become infected with hepatitis B [music]
are at much higher risk of long-term
health problems. of those who are
infected at birth, 95% of them become
chronic carriers. [music] So what does
it mean to be a chronic carrier? It
means that you're at risk for endstage
liver disease, for liver cancer, for
[music] infecting other people. But if
you vaccinate at birth, that never
happens.
And [music] later today, the Supreme
Court will hear arguments in a major
test of President Trump's power. The
case revolves around the question of
whether Trump [music] can fire a
Democratic member of the Federal Trade
Commission, an independent agency,
simply because she is not aligned with
his political agenda. An existing
[music] law says that the president can
only remove commissioners for wrongdoing
or for neglecting their [music] duties.
A ruling in Trump's favor would overturn
90 years of [music] legal precedent.
Today's episode was [music] produced by
Carlos Prito and Michael Simon Johnson
with help from Eric KKY. It was edited
by Patricia Willins with [music] help
from Lexi Dial. Contains music by Diane
Wong, Marian Lozano, and Dan [music]
Powell, and was engineered by Chris
Wood.
Special thanks to TBI Romero, Sheila
Ordinetta, Issa Yen [music] Herrera, and
Adriana Lorero Fernandez.
[music]
[music] That's it for the Daily. I'm
Michael Bavaro.
See you tomorrow.